Minecraft's r-tx really surprised us
over the past year apparently nvidia has
made meaningful improvements to both the
LSS moving out of Vaseline on camera
blurry meme status and into potentially
useful status and improve deterrent exp
tricks in this benchmark we'll be
extensively testing at multiple r-tx
GPUs against Minecraft RT X for Windows
10 including a 60 FPS normalized chunk
render distance benchmark standard
benchmarks with RT X on off DL SS on and
off and will include visual analysis of
many of the features in Minecraft snoo
beta the benchmarks help set the bar for
what level of performance is needed to
play Minecraft yeah that's that's where
we are now we're trying to play
Minecraft before that this video is
brought to you by Squarespace
Squarespace is what we've been using for
years to manage our own gamers Nexus
store and we've been incredibly happy
with the choice Squarespace makes
ecommerce easy for those interested in
starting stores but it also has powerful
tools to build all types of websites
photo galleries for photographers resume
and portfolio sites and small business
sites are all easily done through
Squarespace having built a lot of client
websites the old way before running GN
full-time we can easily recommend
Squarespace as a powerful fast solution
go to squarespace.com slash gamers Nexus
to get 10% off your first purchase with
Squarespace we had a pretty complicated
test matrix for this one between the
variations of our TX on and off and DL
SS on and off we also had to deal with
things like the chunk render distance so
this is a major component to Minecraft
it effectively determines your your view
distance in the game and given how the
game is built and how it mechanically
works that's a large part of it so
there's a lot to test just to make sure
we're clear upfront on everything we're
going to be talking about a lot of
graphical improvements that are specific
to Minecraft but are not new to the
industry so simple additions like
roughness maps and normal maps are a
commonplace in basically every game
minecraft didn't have native roughness
metalness normal Maps it's lacking a lot
of stuff so when we talk about these
things please remember that these are
not new technologies a lot of this stuff
is not special
RTX and video only features it's just
minecraft finally got this stuff because
r-tx is rolling out with it and they
work together so all the textures right
now it's they more or less without the
r-tx version are only a color map and
then the game is rendered unlit to some
extent chapters will be included in the
description to help navigation
particularly to make sure people see the
quality analysis and the charts like we
have a lot of data in here and
discussion towards the end on DL SS and
this is also one of the games I've had
the most fun benchmarking recently
because I haven't personally played
minecraft since around got it in alpha
and last played it when it was exiting
beta so it's been a while and this was a
fun meta automation of a benchmark
because we automated our benchmark
within the game with the game parameters
and so we basically use the mind cards
to build the track to automate on a time
or what our benchmark was anyway it's
really difficult to benchmark accurately
for a lot of reasons most of them are
related to Minecraft optimization in
general but we'll talk about that more
later let's start off with an overview
of the changes for minecraft RT X and
some initial graphics analysis we'll get
into the numbers and then we'll go
through the rest of the graphics
analysis minecraft is almost an
accidentally perfect candidate for RT X
but it's not for the obvious reasons
traditionally NVIDIA has pushed for the
feature to be included in major triple-a
graphics titles like Battlefield 5 and
that's become more of a balancing act
between the high poly highly complex
games getting juggled with real time ray
tracing add-ons the end result has
typically been a trade-off of what
graphics options in the game get turned
off or sacrificed in order to turn on RT
x and support the performance or how low
of a resolution you're willing to bring
the game down to minecraft meanwhile has
basically no native unmod at graphics
quality to speak of the texture
resolutions stock are abominable and the
game itself is entirely comprised of
simple geometry we're not saying that in
a mean or a critical way we've played a
lot of Minecraft here so that's the
entire appeal of Minecraft it sort of
works here because ray-tracing features
aren't competing with traditional
triple-a graphics quality in this title
it's able to take almost all of the GPU
horsepower to prioritize rendering
ray-traced scenes
in an amusing way this is also why D LSS
if it works better in its new iteration
which will inspect today is a good
inclusion for Minecraft the LSS works on
neural networks to build predictions of
how a game will unfold frame by frame
the end goal being that a player would
enable both DL SS and RT acts in order
to negate one another in performance but
end up with a net higher graphics
quality that hasn't really worked yet
and DL SS was deservingly mocked on our
channel and others for its comical
launch over a year ago now NVIDIA is
trying again with the LSS 2.0 and the
company claims it's really fixed at this
time
minecraft is probably the most
predictable type of game of all time for
that neural net to work with and you're
also working with a game where lower
resolution doesn't have as profound of
an effect as it would in a game with a
greater fine detail or nuanced texture
to work with if the LSS doesn't work
here it really would have no chance to
work anywhere get into minecraft content
then it makes these key changes PBR
compliance has been added for materials
in the game physically based rendering
is something we've covered in the past
with the Crytek team but the crux of it
is that a given material will now have
metallic and roughness values which are
two properties that define almost every
surface in the real world the texture
Maps added include roughness on items
like bricks in the game where a
roughness map is used to influence
reflectivity off the surface of the
object the mortar meanwhile between the
bricks is rougher and less reflective
while the brick is smoother and shinier
another addition was normal Maps which
work by distorting how the light
interacts with the surface of the mesh
also known as an object an example can
be seen with blocks of iron where the
normal Maps now make it seem as if there
are five bars bulging off of the surface
and the original graphics for that would
look basically completely flat global
illumination was also added this is
something we've defined fairly recently
in great detail it's the calculation of
light bouncing off of multiple services
multiple times
RTX shadows make secluded areas
significantly darker like in forests
bloom is now enabled Authority exon
pretty much everyone remembers what that
is from the many years ago when that was
a big thing in every game and glass and
water exhibit reflections and
refractions
are appropriate so none of these are
brand new to the world of computer
graphics but they're new to Minecraft
one quick note of fairness of analysis
to some levels have resource packs which
add emissivity from a block so you have
light coming off of a block often the
terracotta blocks but they don't add it
to the non r-tx variant remember that
these light emissions could at least be
added to the non r-tx block so you at
least have some emission of light like a
torch would do some of the effects could
also be faked you could make up for a
lot of the r-tx features by working on
the graphics with traditional techniques
to fake the higher quality graphics but
r-tx is a much easier way to execute
without wreak rafting the entire game
and that's where we get the meme phrase
it just works if everyone wanted a fair
demo they'd at least add a light
emission to both the r-tx and non r-tx
blocks and they might even consider
faking some of the other effects for non
r-tx
we just wanted to make sure that you're
aware that it's not always fair to
simply show the r-tx on and off and
toggle them to compare because some of
the maps and resource packs with the
artsy acts off version have had no
additional work invested including a
lack of basic parameters like light
there's more to it too but we should get
into the initial benchmarks first talk
through the numbers of how GBS perform
and then we'll look at DL SS we need to
start with some initial research on a
per map basis before we progress when
testing minecraft we explored each of n
videos bundled in 6 RT acts Maps to
better understand the environment
because the game is almost completely
player created there's a wide range and
performance potential our footage should
illustrate this the aquatic map with its
large glass dome under a waterfall has a
lot of reflections and refractions that
strain the GPU in different ways from
the jungle map which is more similar to
standard survival mode minecraft and
different still from the stressful
dystopian city map that we standardized
for testing the shadow and light map was
good as a showcase of ray tracing but
some of its indoor settings naturally
restricts viewing distance and restrict
the amount of objects visible on the
screen so the map itself is barren
inside of each of the rooms the first
chart is strictly research which we used
to decide how we're going to test a game
prior to committing a few days of doing
testing this chart shows the results for
a 2080 super tested with 8 chunks drawn
at 1080p with RT axon and DL SS on well
test other settings later in the video
here you can see that the shadow and
light map using the mirror room renders
at 104 FPS average with the 2080 super
on these settings the Crystal Palace map
renders at 83 FPS average in our test
area while the aquarium section of the
shadow and light map renders at 76 FPS
average the stress tests that GN used
located in the dystopian City renders at
about 71 FPS average so it's more
similar to the aquarium area of the
previous test this is like for like
testing across different maps with the
same GPU and the entire point of this is
to illustrate that the vastly varied
environments your framerate what matters
most for a benchmark is consistency so
that we can fairly compare devices
head-to-head so as long as we pick one
map and stick to it we can at least make
a comparison for hierarchy of kart for
this one we noticed that the city level
had the lowest run to run deviation of
all and was the most reliable and also
the most stressful so we stuck with it
as a representation of the extreme end
everything should scale with relatively
the same stack in the hierarchy so you
won't see much movement from where the
cards are relative to each other just
gonna be the absolute frame rate that
changes the city benchmark we used was
sort of fun anyway because it was a meta
automation that we were able to develop
in this level where we built a simple
minecart track with a known speed and on
a known time each direction so we can
consistently test using real-world
gameplay across a variety of graphics
elements in the level one of the most
important things for benchmarking
minecraft is traversal of terrain such
that the chunks are drawn and purged to
and from the screen without this you
lose the realistic and and most of the
load intensive elements of the game are
lost with that our mind track helps us
traverse far enough to influence trunk
loading which also helps better
understand performance for the chart
that's coming up in a minute we're doing
a simpler task that's hopefully useful
to more serious minecraft players who
have experience with the games existing
but limited graphics settings minecraft
renders its world in clusters of blocks
and data known as chunks which is going
to be an annoying name to say
this video with our TX disabled we can
see pretty clearly as each chunk draws
into the world given our render distance
settings without our TX those settings
include a 96 trunk default 128 trunk
option 160 option and that goes down as
well if you're running on really low end
hardware each draws increasingly more of
the world before fading out of draw
distance but also significantly
increases system load for our TX your
options start at 8 chunks rather than
something like 32 or 96 and then go to
12 16 20 and 24 it's significantly more
limited by nature of our TX we did a 60
FPS normalized benchmark to look at
chunks draw distance while maintaining
60 FPS with our TX on and with the LSSI
this means that we increase the draw
distance until we hit 60 FPS sustained
plus or minus about 2 FPS we have some
leeway there well have charts with more
precise FPS numbers in a moment
but this is more of a functional task
for players who want to know how much of
the world they can actually see here's
the chart the 20 ATT I draw 16 chunks at
1080p 60fps but couldn't go higher at 60
at 1440p it does 12 chunks at 60fps and
at 4k it is incapable of reaching 60 FPS
in our test world even with 8 chunks
drawn the r-tx 2080 super rendered 12
chunks at 1080p 60fps 8 at 1440p 60 FPS
and was below 60 FPS at 4k so unable to
render the minimum 8 at 60fps it can
still render it can still play and we'll
get to that later just not at 60 that
said the 2080 super was within a couple
of frames per second of hitting 16
chunks drawn at 1080p so we'd count this
as 16 and less intensive maps and
workloads especially as things get
optimized later by Nvidia and Microsoft
the 2060 super is barely able to hold at
8 chunks for 60fps at 1080p it's
technically below that it's at 55 but
it's close enough that we're counting it
since this is a more intensive map the
2060 ko is incapable of reaching 60 with
our TX and DL SS enabled in our test
suite for a first set of comparative
tests we'll start with 1080p our TX on
DLS has on and 8 chunks render distance
tested in our custom course on the
dystopian city map the RTR 2080 Ti
Stream holds that about 90 FPS average
with lows relatively consistent run to
run at 59 FPS 1% and 50 for FPS 0.1%
that puts the 20 atti
about 26% ahead of the 20 80s super as
wouldn't make sense the 20 80 super is
about 7.2 percent ahead of the 2017 /
which maintains 60 fps and heavy load
scenarios at 1080p and with a draw
distance of again 8 this keeps the 2070
super and overall good classification in
terms of experience the two are so close
though that we at first didn't trust the
numbers so we ran the tests a few more
times 8 more passes on the devices and
it didn't change we think this is
because the RT hardware is so similar
that at 40 cores RT cores that is versus
48 RT cores they're close enough that
the more limiting factor is the RT
Hardware for once rather than
rasterization performance the 27 t super
leads the 20 60 super by 21% which also
leads the 20 60 KO by 21 percent the 20
60 KO struggles noticeably on this
heavier map although do ok on less
intensive worlds that are not as RTX
feature focused if we look at the
graphics options for the game there
aren't many that you can adjust to help
with performance so the 2016 on super
cards will be the ones that are the most
on edge of running adequately you can
further reduce resolution you could try
to stick to less arty XIV world you
could turn off fancy rendering settings
as they're called in Minecraft but none
of that's particularly helpful aside
from the resolution reduction if you're
playing in survival mode and you're
unlikely to build a metropolis that is
replete with shiny objects that are TX
likes then the 2060 would fare better
and remain more playable for reference
standard deviation and average FPS was
0.4 to 0.6 FPS so it's actually
incredibly consistent with our TX on our
TX office a different story but on its
pretty good standard deviation in 0.1
percent lows is always much higher by
the nature of 0.1 percent lows but it
was still fairly controlled for a beta
of a game which is notoriously
unoptimized already we measured that at
about three points 1440p comparative
benchmarks show similar scaling just
with overall lower frame rates the
twenty atti drops to 72 FPS average from
ones 1080p result of
my FPS average which is a reduction of
20% from the resolution increase keep in
mind that DL SS changes properties based
on resolution so it's not fully like for
like as a comparison between the
resolutions the 2080 super is still
around the 60 FPS marker at 56 FPS
average the 2070 super is falling behind
but we'd still consider it playable on
most survival worlds with less rate
raise the intensity and the 2060 ko
falls off at this point and feels slow
on input as a result of its lower frame
rate 4k is rough even with the
performance optimized settings applied
for DL SS at this resolution it doesn't
really look that great for the 2080 TI
the 2080 TI has now fallen another 33
percent from its 1440p results to 48 fps
average the can it run minecraft mean
that we've seen in our comments lately
has actually become a reality so good
job internet commentaries you got what
you wished for it now our only hope is
Crysis remastered the 2080 Super and the
2070 super don't hold up well either and
at this point it'd be best to drop
resolution and keep our TX
fortunately with Minecraft that decision
is easy to make you're not really
missing out on a ton with a lower
resolution in most instances especially
if you're talking 4k down to 1440 and
using DL SS even with the heavier
texture packs and RT X in this instance
adds disproportionately more value than
it would in other titles where you have
to juggle between whether you want
higher shadow quality or more geometry
detail and this one everything's a cube
so it's pretty easy toss up for some
perspective as to how things work in the
game this chart shows more of our
research with just the RT X 2080 super
we have a complex test matrix here
there's our TX on our TX on with the LSS
on our TX off our TX on with the LSS off
and then there's also a chunk distance
and our TX off and chunk distance and so
forth obviously disabling our TX worked
the best at 1080p with the 2080 Super we
were bound by the CPU so we'd have an
even higher frame rate of the CPU were
capable
that's expected of a game where the well
of this caliber and it means that the
framerate hit from enabling our DX is
greater than what we can demonstrate in
this example that's especially true
because we can't provide a like-for-like
drop in frame rate from enabling RT acts
because we can't in the game set the
chunk draw distance equal in a way that
it's within the bounds of what the CPU
can do with our TX off and within the
bounds of what the GPU can do with our
TX on so it's not even comparison with a
96 chunk draw distance which is
significantly and noticeably farther
than the a chunk our TX default option
we saw 180 FPS average with pretty far
behind lows due to high variability when
our TX is off which is either a
Minecraft issue in general or a
minecraft r-tx issue with Windows 10 we
should note that we had another test run
at 300 FPS + so our TX disabled with
this chunk count is almost impossible to
test consistently since it draws sort of
differently each time either way that's
our baseline here our next best was 40%
of the framerate of our TX off in this
chart at 71 FPS for the our TX on DL SS
on render which helped improve
performance with DL SS but what's still
a big drop this is a heavy hitter to
performance even in this game but that's
what makes RT acts such a natural
candidate for Minecraft there's not much
else going on in the scene so RT X can
get full focus of the GPU
expanding our draw distance to 12
reduced FPS by 6% expanding it to 16
reduced FPS by a further 12 percent on
top of that and it's a nonlinear drop in
framerate as the draw distance increases
our next our TX on jump goes to 20
chunks the LSS enabled at 47 FPS average
or a 19 percent drop from the 16 junk
option at 59 FPS average this is about
the same performance as disabling RT X
and rendering 160 chunks which one you
prefer will depend mostly on preference
but there's no doubt that RT X looks
significantly better for what's drawn
finally the maxed out our TX option is
at 23 FPS average on the 2080 super so
not quite ready for this hardware or
with this iteration of Minecraft RT X
and finally here's a chart of DL SS on
versus off this will precede our DSS on
versus off visual inspection that we'll
do right after this chart if you wanted
to ditch the LSS you'd also be giving up
about a 60% performing
uplift on the 20 atti at 1080p a 63%
uplift on the 2080 super from off to on
66% on the 2070 super 70% on the r-tx
2060 super and about 64 percent only
2060 k out for the most part other than
the KO where it's just choking on
hardware in general the uplift is
nonlinear and increases as the cards get
lower and the LSS does a lot in this
game for performance now we just need to
look at what it does from a visual point
of view finally after all this testing
we sort of made the assumption that most
people would be playing with mostly arti
axon and the LSS enable as the game
becomes too difficult to run without the
LSS this also allows players to maximize
render distance which is arguably more
important than a crisper image still we
need to do a DL SS comparison to really
know minecraft with DL s s can be
nitpicked for differences which is what
we're about to do but it's important not
to lose the forest for the trees
although a lot of small details can be
seen in side-by-side comparisons
actually playing the game which will
shift player focus more toward actions
and less toward pure observation means
that the ability to notice small details
will go down compounding this all the
movement will decrease the player's
ability to spot those differences in
realtime anyway purely to help show the
technical differences we'll start first
with an image of the aquatic palace in
this image going between the LSS on and
off at 4k shows some difference in color
within the keyhole passage mostly and
that's not necessarily better or worse
but just different there are also
differences in lighting on blocks near
the rightmost parapet or the leftmost
towers we think this is because there's
less pixel data to work with when DLS s
is enabled and the resolution is
natively 1080p rather than 4k and super
sampled up so the approximation is less
accurate to the source the bloom around
the floating points of light up in the
air is also much stronger bloom and some
3d applications like blender is done by
Counting pixels to determine the radius
so starting from a smaller base image
could scale up the bloom larger than the
intended native size the differences are
in the same spots at 1080p but are more
pronounced since there's less data to
work with that the native 720p render
resolution the next image is
a castle within a jungle for this one we
noticed that the candle light in the
bottom center entrance is visible in
both 4k with and without the LSS but is
not visible at all with 1080p that 4k
draws this with D LSS on is the
interesting takeaway here we also notice
that the textures on the left side of
the image in the trees is significantly
different this may be because it has
more pixels to show the leaf density but
we're not positive it could also be
something to do with the randomization
of the texture if that is a thing but we
don't work with Minecraft enough anymore
to remember on the right side we also
see lighting changes in the forest
similar to the previous image in our
Crystal Palace example next we noticed
more highlights on the edges of objects
like the red bridge on the left and also
noticed slightly brighter lighting
toward the upper right of the castle we
think this is related to reduced
geometric information at 720p native
resolution finally in the shadow and
light demo we see that DLS s still has
some of its blurry roots the water
reflections at the bottom of the screen
are blurrier with TLS s on there's
reduced ambient occlusion or less
profound shadows in the corners and
that's toward the back wall the
sharpness of edges is reduced for the
green text we also noticed slight
aliasing on the edges of the green text
shown as thin black line artefacts
overall we classified 1080p with TLS s
off as visually similar or slightly
superior to 4k with the LS s on picking
between them doesn't matter too much
just go with whichever one has more
performance after talking with Andrew
our video editor who does a lot of work
in 3d modeling applications and game
engines we decided that most of these
differences are only really noticeable
when you're comparing the images
side-by-side and looking for them we'd
say that forgoing DL s s is better in a
technical sense of visual quality but
that the performance gained in Minecraft
r-tx specifically far outweighs the less
noticeable quality impact from DL s s
being on and videos implementation is
much better in this game then its
attempts last year of course it does
have its imperfections to make sure
everyone's on the same page we do find
ourselves toggling our TX off somewhat
regularly for either specific bugs or
for navigation of the map a list of
issues and imperfections we encountered
is as follows the noise our artifice
particularly at lower fps can become
very visible we demonstrated this in the
ceiling of the aquarium where rapid
movement showed denoising at the edge of
the view frustum we also noticed this
especially heavily in darker settings
are at lower frame rates when near
clouds it's not ever prevalent but it's
there and again especially there's lower
frame rates
speaking of clouds seem bugged with our
TX on or done in a way that is
mechanically worse with our TX off
they're translucent as they probably
should be but our TX on makes them solid
white this means that they become
annoying from a gameplay perspective and
they don't seem particularly realistic
anyway it seems that backface Coleen
might be disabled with our TX on as well
something that we were able to postulate
based on what happens when you go into a
cloud the player is drawn at the same
time as the rest of the world with our
TX enabled and so the players hand and
the objects will clip through the walls
with our TX on but not with our TX
disabled that's because it has to be
drawn at the same time as everything
else to ensure proper lighting of the
players hand and the object whereas
they're drawn separately with our TX off
this is just a small mechanical item
it's way lower draw distance with our TX
on of course so even when you're at
lighter weight levels your best bet is
going to be 24 chunks and that's taxing
on the more complex levels you get a
pretty standard 96 chunks with our TX
off and can even do more and the bottom
of that is also higher than 24 anyway we
found ourselves toggling our TX off in
order to quickly find places or to
evaluate the map so it can become a
mechanical hindrance in some scenarios
and you might find yourself toggling it
on and off just to navigate at least in
the early stages of the game
some areas also become extremely dark
which becomes a subjective debate it
could provide more gameplay
opportunities for a creator or a mater
who could light paths to better guide
players in their creations but it can
also slow down the mechanics of the game
if you're just trying to navigate
quickly in that older style of Minecraft
so it really this comes down completely
to what you or the map creator is trying
to do there are a lot of avenues here
with the way our TX works to create new
mechanical ways to interact with the
game and there's also ways to annoy
players just depends on how it's used
finally bloom sometimes follows the
screen similar to the paper over the
water in battlefield 5 where you get
some ghosting effect of objects as you
move the camera around so that's it for
our minecraft r-tx video and video has
played this somewhat brilliantly by
partnering with Minecraft and video had
a really rocky launch to RTX
it was something like 50 55 days before
they even had a title out that would
work with RT x part of that was because
microsoft delayed its windows update
past the RT x launch window for the 20
series and so NVIDIA was left high and
dry with no DXR or anything to work with
and launched therefore was was pretty
rough because there was literally zero
value in RT x at launch and there
remains to be value that has extremely
gained dependent but it's growing and
the reason that this particular step is
a brilliant play is that minecraft is a
large enough community that it's got
games within games so you're talking
about an ecosystem of players who will
find ways to mechanically leverage RT X
in addition to visually leverage it to
work with new viable mechanics that
might not have really been viable before
again having really dark forests is
something that either like or don't like
subjectively but it can be leveraged
mechanically to help better guide a
player to where they're supposed to go
and just basic level design so value
goes up disproportionately from adding
this one title to the roster as opposed
to the average triple-a title where it's
pretty locked down and developer
controlled additionally NVIDIA has
shifted the conversation towards ray
tracing in general real-time retrace and
specifically ray tracing is not new they
didn't invent it it's been around for
ages and it's not special but real time
ray tracing is what NVIDIA has been
pushing for and now you see that
suddenly consoles are including it
suddenly am these getting involved so
the conversation has shifted and it's
taken a while and the value is still
questionable depending upon if games
that you like have RT x support in a way
that's competent but minecraft is a
massive addition to that it's one of the
best selling games if not maybe the best
to get selling game aside from things
like peggle or
Tetris so it's up there but anyway
there's still plenty of issues framerate
issues stuff like that this is not a
trivial game to run it's just it's
interesting because of how it's so
graphically non intensive at its core
RTX can be can dominate the entire GPU
and take all those resources for itself
so very interesting stuff but looks good
overall and we'd say compared to the
previous attempts at the LSS job well
done on video on this version at least
with this game it may change we'll see
so that's it for this one subscribe for
more always go to store documents access
net or patreon.com slash gamers Nexus
helps out directly and we'll see you all
next time
[Music]